# Writing docs at Amazon

https://blog.usejournal.com/writing-docs-at-amazon-e025808616bd

Guidelines for writing an Amazon document, summarized and excerpted.

**Favor prose**: Use sentences and paragraphs, not bullet points. Any tables, graphs, charts, etc. should be backed up with real sentences in the document.

**Proofread**: Use proper grammar and spell check. People will think that if you ignore the little stuff, you are probably also careless with the big stuff. If English is not your native language, that’s fine, work with peers to clean things up. Understand your own weaknesses, and work to compensate for them.

**Know your purpose**: Understand what you are trying to accomplish with the document. For example, is this a new project that you want to undertake? Is this a significant change to a planned launch date or feature set (especially of a high-visibility project)? Is this just more of a status update? Is it an answer to a specific question or request, or is this something that you are bringing to the CEO? One of the hardest types of docs to write is a “de-commit” document. Amazon is big on “disagree and commit,” so if you coming back and wanting to de-commit to something previously agreed, you need to have your data and logic clear as to what changed after the plan was committed.

**Minimize surface area**: Omit extraneous stuff. The more “random” things you put in that aren’t directly related to what you are trying to accomplish, the bigger the chance of going off-topic and rat-holing, and the smaller the chance of accomplishing your goal. If something is in the document, the audience assumes that you think it’s important enough to discuss, so they will. If you have a bunch of important things to discuss, it’s usually better to have separate meetings, even if they are consecutive.

**Have the right people in the room**: The subject matter experts should be there. If you are discussing a design issue, yes, the VP of design will be there (and will have probably contributed to / helped edit what is being presented), but the individual graphic or UX designer who did the work should be there too, and should do most of the talking. If you are discussing a product feature that has some limitations due to deep technical challenges, don’t just have the PM and the general engineering lead there, but have the (in our case) natural language processing expert in the room; the CEO doesn’t want to hear the PM’s second-hand explanation — he wants to deeply understand it by talking to someone who’s an expert in that specific thing.

**Check your ego at the door**: The goal of the document is to get to the right answer, even if it’s not the one that you originally proposed. The CEO will almost certainly ask you questions that you didn’t think about. Be ready to debate, discuss, and change your mind. But also be aware that he is equally willing to change his own mind and he highly values that trait. He expects people to speak up and debate honestly and sincerely, based on data and logic; bringing in intuition is fine, as long as you’re willing to identify it as such and propose experiments on how to test it if challenged.

**Show your work**: For example, if you had internal debates in the team about whether the recommendation should have been A, B, or C, write about all three and be explicit about why you think B was the best. The CEO has a broader picture of everything that the company is doing than you do, and what seems obvious to you may be obviously wrong (or just unnecessary) due to some other initiative or some bigger corporate strategy. And seeing that you’ve done that work and looked at multiple options will lead him to trust you more.

**Advocate for the customer**: The customer is the most important person in pretty much all decisions, and the only one not in the room. Write seriously and convincingly about why what you are proposing is good for the customer. This is part of why (almost) everything done at Amazon starts with a press release; the structure of a press release forces you to talk about the project in terms of why the customer cares.

**Don’t surprise or shock your peers (or your boss)**: This is typical at any company. Don’t do last-minute substantive changes to a doc that you, as a team, will be presenting, without letting anyone know. This will lead to a very bad outcome, generally, for you.

**If the document isn't ready then reschedule**: If you are not ready, and you go ahead, then you are wasting the time of busy people.

**Think big enough**: If your document is identifying a problem, and proposing a solution, then think through the rest of the logic. For example, If there are competitors out there, where are they on the scale that you are describing? Will your proposal get you further ahead than they are? You don’t want the CEO to be the one to draw the conclusion, “So, what you’re saying is, we’re going to take 20 years to catch up to $competitor as things are, and your big plan is going to make it only take 10 years to catch up?”

**Read the room**: Sometimes you get into a debate / discussion about some issue, and you know that your team’s position is right, but you just can’t convince the CEO. He’s a human being like anyone else; we all have those days. Speak up, say something like, We hear your points and understand your concerns; we think we’ve not done a good job explaining our thinking or gathering the right, conclusive data, and we’d like to come back in a couple weeks and discuss the topic again.” The CEO will usually be OK with that, and the extra time will give you time to dig in deeper. You may even discover that the CEO was right, or you’ll come back, present the new data / new logic, and he’ll (very) happily say, “you guys were right, thanks for pushing on this.”

**Favor data over generalizations**: Present the numbers and let the audience make their own editorial evaluation. Don’t say, “many more customers who were exposed to the new UX completed the purchase process, while a far smaller number completed their purchases in the original UX.” Say, “567 of 982 (57.7%) of the customers who saw the new UX completed their purchase, while 481 of 1,108 (43.4%) who saw the original UX did so.”