# The Eleven Laws of Showrunning

[Source](https://okbjgm.weebly.com/uploads/3/1/5/0/31506003/11_laws_of_showrunning.pdf)

By Javier Grillo-Marxuach. Published on 2016-01-06.

Upon finding this essay, any number of showrunners with whom I
have worked in the past will assume it is a calculated personal
attack: a retroactive shiv to the kidneys delivered in the
language of a management lesson.

No matter that what follows is a distillation of some twenty
years of experience - ten spent exclusively in upper tier
positions in television series - I wholly expect to read this by
the light of bridges set on fire by any number of former bosses
who will no doubt believe I am writing this out of envy, or to
avenge some perceived slight, or was just too chickenshit to say
it to their faces.

Also, there's nothing in the following 86,000 words about Lost.
If I have worked for you in the past and - after reading all
these disclaimers - you still think that something in the
following text is a singular attack on you, there's a song from
the 1970s I'd like to play for you.

Call me. I know you have my number.

Carly Simon's lyrical stylings aside, it often takes that level
of it's-all-about-me ego to be a television writer/producer: the
conviction that what you have to say matters so much that it is
worth not only mastering the tropes of an entire medium, but also
the risk that all the intermediaries required to turn your
interpretation of those tropes into the finished product (the
actors, directors, producers, the person who embroiders the
series logo on the back of the chairs) will ruin it all with some
fatal blend of incompetence and incomprehension, or out of a
calculating Salierian malice born from resentment of your
undeniable genius.

The dark side of the drive to prove one's primacy of vision
(colloquially better known as "I'LL SHOW YOU FATHER THAT YOU WERE
WRONG TO NOT LOVE ME!") is that inefficient and self-indulgent -
and more often than not abusive - senior management is endemic to
the television industry. As cable, streaming, and Internet
services adopt the television production model to generate
content, the problem only gets worse.

Historically, there never was much of an apprenticeship/
mentorship mentality in television - writers are notoriously
taciturn and parochial about their "creative process." However,
when there were only three to five broadcast networks and a much
longer queue to the top of the food chain, someone who worked
their way up the hierarchy from staff writer (the lowest and
least paid position) to show creator/executive producer/
showrunner could at least be reliably understood to have at least
spent a decade learning how to make the trains run on time under
the oftentimes capricious tutelage of writer/producers who had
endured the same trials.

Nowadays, programming outlets are as likely (if not more, due to
the never-ending quest for "a fresh voice") to buy television
pilots from playwrights, screenwriters (many of whom toil for
years - and are very well paid - without ever having to do the
practical work involved in production), novelists, investigative
journalists, and bloggers whose "my year of doing this and not
that" article managed to break the Internet... and then put them
in the position of having to manage what is essentially a start-
up corporation with a budget in the eight figures and a hundred-
plus employee workforce.

For many, the undeniable triumph that is pitching a series idea,
having a pilot ordered, successfully producing it, and then
having it ordered to series is nothing less than a validation:
not only their voice and talent, but also of their Way of Doing
Things. This often translates to an intractable adherence to the
notion that "my creative process" is so of the essence to success
that all other concerns must be made subordinate lest the
delicate alchemy that made success possible be snuffed.

The manager of a TV mogul whose work I guarantee you know and
admire once encapsulated this to me with a story. Upon receiving
his first series order, the then-neophyte showrunner declared
"Good, I can now be the monster I always knew I could be."

This fundamental misunderstanding of what it means to be a
showrunner is only further enabled by television networks and
studios. The economics of TV and film are such that a single,
long-running hit show can not only support entire multinational
corporations, it also funds all of their development for years
running. For a television network, a single tentpole series can
cement the network's brand for decades to come, set the pattern
for duplicatable success, and create enough wealth to make Midas
blush.

Consider CSI: Crime Scene Investigation. For a decade-and-a-half,
the CSI franchise anchored CBS's reputation as the go-to
destination for solidly-crafted, edgy, visually-innovative, case-
of-the-week crime procedurals. CSI set the pattern for the
network's subsequent hit shows - most of them following the basic
outline of a gifted investigator leading a team of specialists in
solving exotic mysteries (Without a Trace, Cold Case, Criminal
Minds, Criminals Minds Beyond Borders, Criminal Minds: Suspect
Behavior, NCIS, NCIS: LA, NCIS: New Orleans, Elementary,
Limitless, Hawaii 5-0, Scorpion). CSI also spun off three
satellite shows (CSI: Miami, CSI: NY, and CSI: Cyber) - of which
Miami surpassed even the original as the most watched television
series in The World.

Most importantly - far more so than such esoteric concerns as
"aesthetics" and "artistic accomplishment" - the sheer volume of
revenue generated by CSI simply boggles any ordinary mortal's
dreams of avarice.

With all of this at stake - with success literally meaning the
difference between a fifteen-year bull market and a Saharan
drought - it is unsurprising that most showrunners are, and are
tacitly allowed to remain, some of the most incompetent senior
managers in the business world?

Because a hit (even a middling one... or even just a show that
could become profitable by sheer dint of being on the air) has
such revenue and image-generating potential, is it shocking that
studios and networks will tolerate an almost endless amount of
dysfunction - and are more than willing to avert their eyes from
How The Sausage Is Made - in the name of getting it on time and
on budget, and to preserve whatever sorcery it took to get there?

Of course not.

There are only two real sins for which a showrunner pays with a
pink slip: wasting time and squandering money, and both of these
contingencies are amply prepared for in studio plans and budgets.
Missing an airdate and going egregiously (and I do mean "way
beyond the pale" egregiously) over budget are the only two real
firing offenses in the TV business... and, in truth, there is an
entire army of dedicated professionals who stand beneath the
showrunner day in and out to make sure that doesn't happen.

Why? Because they depend on the show - and the perceived creative
and managerial genius of the showrunner - for their living.
That's why.

So, once they have a show on the air, even the most inept of
managers - or the most sociopathic of abusers - muddle through
and keep their show on the air on something resembling time and
on budget: usually by the sweat of a lot of talented individuals
who are then denied credit for their toil at the altar of the
"visionary auteur"'s brilliance.

Beyond that, who cares if the writers are made to sleep in cots
in their offices and only go home for showers because the
showrunner can't decide what story they want to tell and has them
rewriting scenes that shoot the next day while they create story
for an episode that is already in prep and starts filming the day
after but doesn't have a script yet? Or that the assistants are
verbally abused on a daily basis because they can't cover the
phones and pick up lunches while performing personal services
such as taking the showrunner's medical samples to his doctor and
taping his children's recitals? Or that the art director and lead
scenic painter are being asked by the showrunner's wife to
redecorate his house and they are doing it because they know that
to say no means to lose their job?

Studios and networks are far happier off letting their precious
messianic autocrats persist in their belief that they are
geniuses on par with Mozart - and that it is only the sheer
idiosyncrasy of their "creative process" that allows the show to
go on - than to take the risk of disrupting the creation of a hit
show with such earthly concerns as fomenting a workflow that
actually takes into account that the employees are human beings.
As long as the show comes in on time, on budget, and makes money,
who cares?

The dirty little secret of TV, however, is that those who get
their pilots made and show picked up on any given year are
usually no more gifted, visionary, or prodigious, than the ones
who did not. There are as many television writers who work
regularly as there are professional NBA players at any given time
- and, by that metric, we are all breathing rarefied air - but
the process by which television shows are made and selected is by
no means some mystical divination by which the special artistry
of very special snowflakes is empowered that it may elevate the
art form as a whole.

This is what actually happened when a show got on the air: an
inventor (I mean "a writer") had an idea. Through a series of
channels ("agents") the inventor went to a venture capitalist ("a
studio") and got some guidance about developing the product.
Together they then took it to a retailer ("network") who agreed
to front money to build a prototype ("pilot"), and later, based
on that prototype and their extant successes and projected needs
(the "shows that they kept from last year and the ones that got
cancelled"), they decided to put the entire product line (the
"series") on their department store windows (their "air").
Television is - quite simply - a business: with seasonal
patterns, production schedules, budgets, and deliverables... just
like any other business.

And that's the dirtiest secret of the trade: it ain't magic, it
ain't alchemy, and it sure as Shinola ain't mystical. The critics
may call this a "golden age" - and it very well may be - but it's
not the work of druidic conjurers on exotic hallucinogens
wresting narrative from altars of living rock.

What we do is nothing more - or less - than mere hard work.. hard
work that is not exclusive to any one person, but helped along by
scores of competent, experienced professionals whose job security
is tied to the longevity of the endeavor... hard work that can be
done efficiently and thoughtfully... hard work that can be
accomplished in a way that doesn't ask anyone involved to
sacrifice their lives, dignity, and - sometimes - personal
safety.

As special and wonderful as creativity may be, it is something
that can be channeled, managed, made to work on call, and sent to
bed at a decent hour. Any television show - from the worst of the
formulaic, to the most genre-defining, medium-transforming
phenomenon - can be made on time, on budget, and without
demanding that any of the employees put more time at the mine
than they absolutely have to... if the showrunners simply apply
basic, commonsensical management strategy to their creative
process.

Though specific to the day-to-day workflow of television, and the
issues of writing and producing episodes of a series week and and
week out, the following "laws" will seem - in principle -
bafflingly simple to anyone who has worked in a professional
environment, understands the need to effectively communicate to
employees the goals of an organization in order to succeed, and
believes that effective leadership comes from giving clear
commands and directives. Yet the truth remains that the number of
showrunners whose staffs would describe them as "effective
managers of the creative process" is in the minority.

Why is it so hard to implement some simple strategies in the name
of running the show more efficiently?

The simple answer is that "simple" doesn't necessarily mean
"easy". In my experience, the simplest decisions are often the
hardest because they demand a painful concession to an unpleasant
truth. In the case of every one of the laws below, they all ask
for the same thing: that a showrunner surrender some
infinitesimal quantum of their ego - of their attachment to the
idea of themselves as the sole fountainhead of the show's
greatness - to serve the show and those who work to make it
instead of themselves.

It seems like a contradiction - to ask someone from whom
visionary leadership is demanded to surrender their ego - but it
isn't, because of...

THE FIRST LAW OF SHOWRUNNING

IT'S ALL ABOUT YOU

NOW STOP MAKING IT ALL ABOUT YOU

No, seriously, it REALLY is all about you.

You pitched an idea, sold a script, and got it made. You did it.
You pushed it past the pezzonovanti. Now you have sixty million
dollars and thirteen hours of network airtime - with a strong
possibility for much more - for a bully pulpit. Nothing goes in
front of the lens that you do not approve. Nothing gets on the
screen without your stamp.

So you finally have the Brass Ring... and guess what? It won't
make that you never found a publisher for your first novel any
less painful, and it won't make your daddy finally love you, or
your spouse more sexually compliant, or your kids less disdainful
of your bad puns and clumsy attempts to make them understand that
you really DID like and understand that last Sky Ferreira album.
You're still you. All the shit you hate about yourself is never
going away. Deal with that.

You wanna know what it means when it's all about you?

More work.

For a functional showrunner, "more work" translates into putting
your affectations behind, and performing day-in-and-out in
service of your vision and your staff.

Once you accept that, accept this too: your staff works for you.
They will do whatever you need done because they enter every
conversation knowing that you can fire them. Their indenture is a
given. Their loyalty is not.

By and large, your staff is here for a paycheck - that and the
dimly remembered hope that they will receive some sort of
creative fulfillment in the plying of their craft. It's on you to
invest them in the vision of the show and turn them into true
believers and dedicated workers who will go the extra mile... you
do that by giving them the opportunity to express themselves
within the framework you have created.

You know how you DON'T do that? By continually - and either
passive-aggressively, or aggressively-aggressively - reminding
them who's boss.

Everyone. Knows. It. Already.

The real question is: What will you do with that power? Will you
demand that everyone jockey for your favor in order to have the
information they need to do their job, or will you provide the
information freely so that creativity blooms because, and not in
spite, of you?

Are you strong and secure enough in your talent and
accomplishment to accept the possibility that other people -
properly empowered by you - can actually enhance your genius...
or will you cling to the idea that only you can be the source of
that genius?

How you answer that question determines the leader you will be.

THE SECOND LAW OF SHOWRUNNING

KNOW YOUR SHOW

AND TELL EVERYONE WHAT IT IS

It seems weird that someone would sell a show and then not really
"know" what it is - or would be unwilling to share that
information. Kind of like Steve Jobs not telling his staff more
about the iPod than that "it's white and needs a dial"... and
yet, not knowing - or not telling - what the show is one of the
most common chronic diseases of the incompetent showrunner.

You see, there's more to knowing your show than understanding why
you feel bad about your daddy never loving you and that you were
able to turn that set of emotions into a police procedural
(though your writers will most likely need that information
stated to them very clearly and frequently that they may
understand what you want them to deliver). All of your employees
- from the directors to the costume designers to the guy who
embroiders the back of the chairs - need specific knowledge of
tone, texture, and technique of the show to do their jobs.

Even after producing the pilot episode, most of that valuable and
absolutely crucial information still remains in your head.
Remember, the pilot episode was a prototype - and was probably
picked over by everyone at network, studio, marketing, etc. Now
you have to discern what it was that worked so well in the pilot
- and it may not have been solely the parts you were able to
dictate and control - and turn them into a reproducible result.
You also have to figure out the things that didn't work - a task
that requires a certain amount of honesty and self-reflection -
and then articulate to your writers and you crew how you want
them fixed.

Regardless of what you have been told about sitting in a garret
and writing scripts that would make Rod Serling turn green, most
of your work as a showrunner is to communicate that information
to other people so that they can execute it within their field of
expertise.

One of the great contradictions of the way we make television in
the United States is that writers are given managerial control
over the entire enterprise... but writers are very often by
nature not very good communicators outside the page. Also,
talking to people non-stop, all day, with great specificity about
a project this size is hard, and tiring. Easier to hide in your
office and wait for them to come to you, right?

Well... it is true that not everyone believes that knowing what
they want, and reaching out to those who need to know it in order
to perform, is a necessity for success in the world of
television... and this is the part where they come out from their
slimy, shit-stained hole and excuse their lack of vision (or
their unwillingness to impart that vision) with a defense I
consider to be the most cowardly and thieving seven words in the
showrunner's lexicon:

"I'll know it when I see it."

If you ever find yourself saying that, kindly consider the
possibility that - and I mean this, from the heart - your
impostor syndrome is most likely real and you are, in fact, a
shrill, shrieking fraud.

Here's what "I'll know it when I see it" means to me and to
everyone who hears it from a showrunner: "I have no original
ideas of my own but am perfectly willing to let everyone else
spin their wheels and exhaust themselves emotionally and
creatively so that I can eventually cherry-pick the best of their
genius and claim it for my own."

The field of television is littered with the desiccated husks of
eager artists of all stripes - from writers to casting directors,
production designers, actors, scenic painters, set builders, and
the people who embroider the backs of the chairs - who, in the
name of their own honor and work ethic, wore themselves out on
the wheel of "I'll know it when I see it"... and the high castles
surrounding those fields are occupied by fat, bloated barons who
sit on their comfy thrones wondering with great self pity why
they can't seem to hire a staff that just "gets it."

When you're a showrunner, it is on you to define the tone, the
stakes, the story, and the characters. You are NOT a curator of
other people's ideas. You are their motivator, their inspiration,
and - ultimately - the person responsible for their
implementation.

Bottom line: the creativity of your staff isn't for coming up
with your shit for you, it's for making your shit bigger and
better once you've come up with it!

To say "I'll know it when I see it" is to abdicate the hard work
of creation while egotistically hoarding the authority to declare
what is or isn't good. "I'll know it when I see it" is an act of
intellectual theft on par with plagiarism.

Anyone can say "I'll know it when I see it": the writer's ability
to MAKE SHIT UP is the reason we, and not the producers or the
directors, are the showrunners in American television. To be an
effective showrunner, you have to articulate what Maya Lin once
referred to as "a strong, clear vision." You have to draw the
boundaries of the sandbox with extreme precision, detail,
consistency, and integrity.

And you know what? That's hard. It requires intellectual and
creative rigor, it requires a measure of non-solipsistic
introspection, and it requires that you make a discipline out of
talking to other people and being on message at all times.
You know what else? That's your job. Surprise!

Turns out showrunning isn't about sitting alone in a darkened
office wrestling your personal demons until they come out on the
page as genius. Your job is to communicate a shared vision with
enough specificity that everyone understands it, and to then
preach it, day in and out, to the point of exhaustion until
everyone - from the directors to the actors to the guy who
embroiders the back of the chairs - feels it in their soul like a
gospel.

And here's the great part of successfully communicating a shared
vision: your employees will love you for it.

You can give out jackets with the show's logo. You can send an
ice cream truck to the set. You can hand out fifty dollar bills
to the assistants in penance for screaming obscenities at them...
but that's just bread and circuses. That's bribes.

Loyalty to an employer begins with the knowledge of what the job
is. Loyalty comes from knowing that your bosses have your back
both in the form of giving out the information necessary to not
only do what you do and do it right, and also the empowerment to
use your own creativity to try to improve on the baseline.
Loyalty is the product of knowing that the boss trusts you with
the crown jewels.

And yes, that's a hard leap of faith for the showrunner to make.
Luckily you're a visionary and not an "I'll know it when I see
it" person.

Right?

As someone who has squandered hours, days, and weeks - and more
than once, months - of his life in the vampiric feeding troughs
of several "I'll know it when I see it" showrunners, I am not
above hitting below the belt on this one: every time you say
"I'll know it when I see it," you're proving daddy right.

THE THIRD LAW OF SHOWRUNNING:
ALWAYS DESCRIBE A PATH TO SUCCESS

I know, I know... we're not even a third of the way there and
already you have SUCH a headache... being a leader is so tough,
and tedious, and you already feel high lonesome for the days when
you were young and careless, and could stay up late in your home
office, writing your precious little scripts in a nimbus of Red
Bull, nicotine, and online porn.

I feel your pain, Sparky, but stick with me here. This one is
directly related to the last and a real pattern emerges from here
on out. I promise.

Describing a path to success is the natural outgrowth of Know
Your Show and Tell Everyone What It Is at All Times. This piece
of advice was given to me by John Ziffren - who was a non-writing
Executive Producer on my show The Middleman - and who strove to
create an environment where I could excel in communicating the
goals of the show to all comers.

"Always Describe a Path to Success" simply means - in its most
practical form - "Do not leave a meeting without letting everyone
there know what they are expected to do/deliver next."

The most toxic thing a showrunner can do before leaving the
writer's room - or any room, for that matter - is to say "fuck
it, I don't know, guys, figure it out." Which is like saying "I'm
leaving it up to you losers to disappoint me - go!"

If you tell your staff how to please you, two out of three times
they will come back with a way to do exactly what you want. If
they can't, they will often come up with a number of better ideas
than the one you pitched out of a desire to address the spirit,
if not the letter, of a clear directive.

Every clear directive you issue is a gift to your staff because
it relieves them of the duty to go back into their offices,
slaughter a lamb, and read the entrails in the hopes that a close
examination of their arterial topography will divinely reveal a
portent indicating what the fuck it is that you really want.

A clear directive is - once again - an indication of trust. See
the pattern emerging here? A clear directive is your way of
saying "Here's the hill we have to take. I have taken the time
and effort to figure out the goal. I now acknowledge that you
have the knowledge and resources to figure out the strategy in a
way I cannot."

To successfully define a path to success, you don't even have to
know the exact hill to take. The grinding race that is television
often means that you yourself may not always know the next goal;
but even if you articulate your order as "Help me figure out the
next hill to take," or "Let me know what our resources are so
that I can make an educated decision about which of all these
hills we should attack next," that alone constitutes a directive
with a defined outcome.

You will be amazed at how much even that measure of clarity will
galvanize a team.

Your job as a showrunner, then, requires that you exert your
creativity on the definition of the problems ahead. By doing that
job - hard though it may be - what you are doing is to free your
staff to do what they do best: dedicate their unique skills to
their solution.

THE FOURTH LAW OF SHOWRUNNING:
MAKE DECISIONS EARLY AND OFTEN

As the days, weeks, and months of pre-, pro-, and post-, churn
away, you will find that - whether you like it or not, and
whether it's in your comfort zone or not - everyone in your
sphere constantly solicits decisions from you... and why
shouldn't they? It's all about you, right?

And yet, an aversion to making decisions is a massively common
ailment in the showrunning trade. As showrunner diseases go,
decision aversion might as well be Non-Hodgkin's, Ebola, and the
thing from Jerry's Kids all rolled up into one lethal, morale-
destroying, confidence-eroding, life-sucking, uber malady.

Decision-averse management is one of the many offshoots of "I'll
know it when I see it"... but unlike its more deleterious cousin,
it does come out of an understandable insecurity...

You see, once you make a decision, the world knows where you
stand. Once you say "This is what this is," you have made your
taste and opinion clear: and the world will judge you.

People will come out of the woodwork with their little notes, and
their little suggestions, and their little ideas, and their
little improvements... and because you are a socially awkward
little writer who wants nothing more than to please daddy, you
will feel the need to compromise... and then your vision will be
diluted and the world will never know your genius.

Now, I may have said that this insecurity is "understandable."
And it is. No one likes to be judged and no one likes to defend
their taste: especially when you are already exposing to a
national audience what is essentially a dramatic expression of
your innermost feelings and desires transformed into a police
procedural.

What I also didn't say is that it's also bullshit of the highest
order and also conduct unbecoming a showrunner.

Of course, you will now attempt to rationalize your decision
aversion as part of the magical process by which you weigh all
the options until you happen on the best possible one.

Wrong. Your decision aversion is not proof of your intellectual
rigor and uncompromising taste. By and large, and to the great
exasperation of many a member of your staff, the option with
which the decision-averse showrunner ultimately runs is usually,
and most likely, among the first they are pitched.

No. Your decision aversion is a stalling tactic designed to let
you have it your way without ruffling too many feathers because
you are way too invested in being seen as a "nice person" and a
"good boss."

But you know what "nice people" and "good bosses" actually do?
They rip off the Band-Aid early, make the case for their
decision, hear out any remaining arguments to a reasonable
degree, then shut down the discussion and send everyone off to
get on with their work.

Yup. That's what "nice" actually looks like: because while "nice"
can mean "affable" and "pleasant," a second definition of "nice"
is also "precise and demanding careful attention."

You want to be "nice?" That's the nice to strive for. You could
also try and smile a little, Sparky - we've all seen your car on
the lot and it's pretty fucking... nice.

Avoiding a decision until the last possible minute while everyone
runs themselves ragged coming up with contingency after
contingency? That's neither flavor of nice. That's you assuming
no one will love you unless you keep them on the leash with the
false hope that they may eventually get their way... it's keeping
everyone attached from their lips to your buttocks until you
finally deign to nut up and do the thing you were going to do
anyway, because the show cannot go on until you say what the show
is.

Your job is to make ideas come to life. The first step in doing
your job is to commit. Commit early. Commit often. Make
committing the same as breathing: you might as well do it now,
because you will have to do it eventually.

Most importantly, the sooner you make a decision, the sooner you
will know from your crew what is achievable, and the sooner they
will be able to expand upon - and use their talents to - elevate
it. The time you spent not deciding is time you rob from your
staff's ability to make whatever the object of the decision the
best it can be.

With alarming frequency, I see decision-averse showrunners look
at dailies, or a director's cut, and say something like "Man,
that set/costume/casting choice/embroidery on the back of that
chair sucks. Why does it suck?"

The answer is, invariably, "Oh, I dunno, Sparky, because you
waited until the last minute to decide what you wanted and no one
had the time to make it the best it could be?"

Of course, you can't say that because the showrunner suffering
from this disease doesn't want to feel judged... the decision-
averse showrunner wants to be told that there are no casualties
to their perceived search for excellence, and that all would be
fine if everyone else were just as rigorous and demanding in
their own work.

Invariably, this leads to the eventual firing of the set/costume
designer/casting director/back of the chair embroidering guy.
It's unfair, it sucks, and now that you have heard it from me,
you can't pretend no one ever told you.

And as far as your desire to not be judged goes - toughen up,
Sparky. Judgment - like winter - is coming. No matter what you
do. Judgment is coming. It comes for the weak. It comes for the
strong. It comes for the hacks and the geniuses in equal measure.
So: do you want to go down swinging or do you want to go like a
chump?

Make that your first decision.

THE FIFTH LAW OF SHOWRUNNING:
DO NOT DEMAND A FINAL PRODUCT AT THE IDEA STAGE

When you sold your pilot, you didn't take an eight million dollar
film of your script to the network meeting with you. You talked
the executives through your idea for a series, the characters,
and your story for the pilot, and they proceeded to entrust you
with millions of dollars to fulfill your vision.

Considering how much the creation of a TV series depends on a
studio and network's ability to visualize a bunch of words on the
page - or coming out of some writer's mouth - it is terrifying to
me how many allegedly seasoned and experienced showrunners lack
the simple skill to understand a story when it is pitched to them
off note cards on a board.

Another example of this inability to visualize on the conceptual
level has taken place on several shows I have worked on... shows
in which the staff has had to write, and rewrite ad nauseum,
thirty to forty page outlines including dialogue in order to
convince the showrunner that - as members of the Writers Guild -
we have the ability to render in script a scene that, in a note
card on the board, or an outline, should be as simply stated as
"they meet cute."

(And, later - after micromanaging the concept phase to the
exclusion of any and all invention on the part of the episode
writer - the showrunners in every one of these shows have
invariably had the audacity to complain that the final scripts
with which they were presented lacked a certain... oh, I don't
know... "flicker of inspiration" and were just "the outlines with
more dialogue.")

Architects can see buildings off blueprints. That's their job.
Your job as a showrunner is to see the gross anatomy of the
stories the writers pitch you off the shorthand of the board. The
next step is to visualize even further down the line as the
writers refine the muscular, circulatory, and nervous systems in
the slightly more detailed treatment of the story, plot, and
scenes in an outline, and - if you don't like the shape of the
surface once the script come in - for you to give notes and
rewrite if necessary.

If, as a showrunner, you repeatedly have to return stories to the
board after they have been outlined or scripted for gross anatomy
work - or find yourself sending your writers off to script and
outline in frustration, only to then rewrite from page one, you
may want to consider doing some work on your own ability to
create and discern story from the foundations up.

Not all writers have this ability, but it is something that can
and should be learned - and which is crucial to making television
- because the physical production of the scripts depends on the
departments having consistent, and accurate communication from
the writers office as to what is coming down the pike.

Problem is, a lot of showrunners - especially those who do not
come from television and did most of their gestational work alone
and outside of the collaborative environment of the writers room
- hate the writers room.

They hate the panoply of voices, and they hate having to
occasionally quiet them for fear of being seen as "not a nice
guy." They also hate the leap of faith that comes from hearing a
story told to them in strokes bolder than the fine grain of a
script - and they also having to take subsequent leap of faith
that the writers will render the story in a way that matches
their voice exactly.

What a lot of these showrunners wind up doing is either
protracting the story breaking process - asking for such detail
in the story break that the writers room becomes a compulsive-
obsessive death march that snuffs out all of the creativity that
would eventually happen when the writer finally faces the blank
page - or simply punting on the writers room altogether.

Many an incompetent showrunner simply retreats to a position
where he or she accepts a story from the writers room only in the
boldest of strokes - declaring approval in the same way a wild
animal caught in a bear trap chews off its own arm in exchange
for freedom - only to then rewrite everything from page one when
the script comes in... again, to the detriment not just of the
writers, who feel that they were sent off on a fool's errand, but
also of all the people who need to know what's actually going to
go in front of the camera in order build, produce, and rehearse
it.

One of things increasingly lost as showrunners are no longer
asked to work their way up the ranks in the television hierarchy
is a comfort level with collaboration in the form of the writers
room, and a knowledge of story - usually born of coming up with
one story after another on other people's shows. It is from this
longitudinal experience of collaboration and story generation
that most showrunners learn how to visualize from the blueprint
level.

How, then, if you do not come from a lifetime of conference and
teamwork, but find yourself forced into collusion with a writers
room - whom you need, if for no other reason, to generate the
sheer volume of material the show demands - do you develop this
skill?

The answer is simple. Trust.

You trust that the extremely expensive staff of professionals you
hired - and which the studio pays extremely well (some of them
earn almost as much as you do!) can actually... you know...
write.

You trust that a writer who pitches you "meet cute" on a note
card on the board can actually write a decent "meet cute" and
doesn't have to act it our for you in the room - because, let's
face it, few of us are actors and the room ain't exactly The
Groundlings Theater.

Just like you, dear showrunner, other writers occasionally need
to retire to their keyboards to do their job to the fullest - and
because you will decide whether or not they have to be fired
after they turn their draft, they are profoundly invested in
doing a good job...

Just know that you are not the audience, you are the chief
designer and architect. Sure, you can demand to be "entertained"
by work that feels complete in its gestational phase, but know
that the inevitable product of that demand is that will you be
bored by it by the time it reaches your desk as a script because
you will have effectively destroyed a crucial part of your
staff's creative process...

And, ironically, it's the part of the process that most
showrunners guard jealously for themselves...

THE SIXTH LAW OF SHOWRUNNING:
WRITE AND REWRITE QUICKLY

Okay, Sparky - this one's gonna be harsh... so I'm gonna start by
smearing Vaseline on your ass, putting a fresh clean diaper on
top, and telling you everything's going to be all right.

Yes, your scripts - as well as the ones you rescue from your
nasty, overpaid and underachieving writers who don't "get it" -
are, in fact an expression of your fragile soul. That's right -
and they must be protected at all cost from the judgments of all
the bad people in the world who want to turn your special and
precious little show into something vulgar and gaudy.

You know what else a script is? A work order.

Without a complete script, no one can decide where they are going
to take the trucks with all the lights and cameras and costumes,
and for how long. Without a script, no one can figure out how
much it's going to cost to make this episode of your series.
Without a script, the actors can't prepare themselves for their
work in front of the camera.

A script is the final and most specific description of the work
that is ahead of the production for several weeks to come. If you
procrastinate - or hold your precious to your bosom like Gollum -
NO. ONE. KNOWS. WHAT. THEIR. JOB. IS.

And there's someone else who needs to read your work on the page
to understand their job. Your writers.

Think about it. A studio has given you millions of dollars to
hire a large staff of people whose mission is to learn how to
produce work that reads and sounds like your voice: the voice
that you convinced a network and a studio was worth a loan in the
tens of millions to realize a television series.

Reproducing that voice is a primary facet of your writing staff's
work; the best and most efficient way they can do that is by
reading your prose and dialogue. The faster you write and deliver
material to your team, the sooner they can integrate your voice
into the process... and the faster you rewrite their work, the
faster they can internalize your changes to their work into the
matrix of that learning process.

For most competent writers working under the exigencies of a
television season, a week and a half is considered ample time to
write the first draft of a script from a solid story break and
outline... and yet, showrunners routinely avail themselves of an
unconscionable span of time to write their own scripts...
especially when that script is a tone-setting season premiere. On
at least three different shows, I have spent some eight weeks
along with the rest of the writing staff, spinning our wheels
trying to break story and create further narrative, wile waiting
for the showrunner to write a season premiere.

During that time, the show's writers are invariably ordered by
the showrunner to launch into their own scripts (as studio,
network, and production demand to know what exactly is going on
and why the pipeline isn't yielding new material) and without
fail, those scripts are eventually judged as inferior in light of
all the new "discoveries" made by the showrunner during their
lengthy retreat into their "creative process" - a retreat for
which everyone winds up paying in time, wasted creative energy,
and time-filling busywork.

In one particularly catastrophic incident, the two-hour season
premiere of a major network series had to be, almost literally,
forcibly seized by the network's president after two months of
the showrunner comma-fucking his draft... only to be ultimately
revealed as so unfilmably divergent from what the showrunner had
promised that it had to be junked entirely.

A replacement two-hour season premiere had to be written over the
course of five business days and a weekend by all the other
writers on the staff, each taking fifteen page segments of the
script. Once assembled, the results were predictably patchy. The
writers never recovered from the delay, the show never really
found its voice, the season was poorly received, and the series
never recovered.

In the other cases, the showrunners merely emerged from their
cozy little garret after neglecting their writers room for weeks
on end, only to deliver exactly the story that had been broken by
the staff on the board, and then pitched to the network and
studio, and outlined. Much to everyone's shock and horror, our
leaders had availed themselves of two months to accomplish what
we would all be expected to do in less than a week per writer per
draft for the remainder of the year.

Yup. Real morale booster.

So here's the brass tacks, Sparky: your show's scripts, as
written - or rewritten - by you are your most effective tool in
your performance of the Second Law. You can't talk to everyone at
all times, and eventually, you have a responsibility to take your
talk from the theoretical to the real.

That's what a script ultimately represents: the concretization of
your voice and gesture. A script is the closest thing there can
be to a finished product until you have a final cut. A script is
your proof of concept, and if its fate is to fail that proof,
then you are better off knowing sooner rather than later, so that
you - and all of your employees - can go to work on fixing what's
broken and right the ship while there is still time.

Scripts are not just the cry of your wounded inner child - and
those of the writers in your employ, by they way - but also the
most crucial and efficient form of communication between cast,
crew, studio, and network available to you. Write them quickly,
rewrite them impassively and efficiently. Work your scripts until
they are ready, but recognize that in a fast-moving business like
television, most of the time they will only be ready enough.

Your best ideas will survive criticism, the worst ones... well,
let's just say that there's no amount of rework that can keep
them alive, and that it may not be worth fighting so hard for
every single one of your precious children anyway, because the
horizon is full of other children, all of whom need your
immediate attention and will quickly make you forget the ones
you've had to leave behind...

THE SEVENTH LAW OF SHOWRUNNING:
TRACK MULTIPLE TARGETS EFFICIENTLY BY DELEGATING RESPONSIBILITY

In the 1980's, the members of the Berlin Symphony told a joke about
their notoriously imperious conductor, Herbert Von Karajan. It
went like this: The maestro gets into a taxi. The driver asks
"Where to?" "It doesn't matter," Von Karajan declaims, "I'm
needed EVERYWHERE!"

With or without the colossal arrogance, that is one of the
essential truths of showrunner life. This is why understanding
the First Law, and practicing the Second, are so important. As
the CEO of your own startup corporation, you are responsible for
every facet of the production of your series: yes, even the
embroidery on the back of the chairs.

And though the writers room - the forge of your show's creation -
is the single most important place in the universe as far as you
should be concerned, everything conspires to keep you away from
it.

(Let me add here that if you don't think the writers room is the
single most important place in the world for you to be, you're
wrong. Unless you're by nature a monomaniac, masochist, or
misanthrope: the kind of insecure buffoon who needs constant
proof that "no one gets it but me". You're not alone in this
fallacy, however, and can have a long and storied career of
making great television while avoiding the writers room and all
those horrible little writers in it: those trolls who constantly
debate everything until they choke the life out of it... mostly
because you have taught them to behave that way by dint of never
making a decision. One showrunner - another multiple award-winner
whose work I guarantee you respect and admire - once told me in a
meeting that "The writers room is where lazy people go to hide
from real work." After I tried to divest him of this stupidity,
he proceeded to not hire me and went on to win an Emmy. Go
figure.)

At any given moment during the course of a television season,
there are five stories that have to be minded: the story in
development on the board in the writers room, the story in
outline, the story being scripted, the story being shot, and the
story being completed in editing and post production.

That means meetings. Costume meetings, set decoration meetings,
hair and make-up meetings, budget meetings, casting concept
calls, network and studio notes calls on multiple drafts of
multiple scripts, outlines, and stories, sound and special
effects spotting in post-production... enough meetings to wear
down even the most extroverted mass-communicator.

And yet, your job is to track all those targets. And never forget
that to accurately and proactively communicate the theme, look,
and style of your show to all these people at all times is the
Second Law of Showrunning... but you do have a secret weapon in
your arsenal designed exactly to combat the fatigue that comes
from always having someone at your door who needs to be told what
is what.

That weapon is, of course, your writers.

It turns out that your writers are not, in fact, a parliament of
meanies whose job it is to take no end of pleasure in getting
your vision wrong on the page while endlessly explaining to you
in the room that your shit stinks.

Though you don't realize it just yet, your writers are, in fact,
your apostles.

Yes... believe it or not, that motley and smelly bunch of
malcontents you keep trying to avoid is - in reality - a misfit
band of spiritual warriors ready to spread your Evangel to every
corner of your show's domain. Believe it or not, that's their
actual job!

The reason the ranking system of writers goes from staff writer,
to story editor, to executive story editor, to co-producer,
producer, supervising producer, and co-executive producer, is
because you're not just running a show - you're also running a
producer/showrunner academy (and even if you are woefully
uninterested in teaching/under qualified to teach this
discipline, this is the duty that fate has thrust upon you).

The way you run a producer/showrunning academy is by making the
writers in the room the privileged bearers of your knowledge of
What The Show Is and then sending them off to all these meetings
to be give a voice to your unique vision.

The reason the Second Law is so important is that, once you use
it to empower your people to spread the Word, it actually takes
stress and labor off your hands... I know, right?

Tracking multiple targets is difficult. Not just "whiny bitch"
difficult, but actually physically and emotionally draining. It
is a nigh-insurmountable, and ever-rising, Everest of work.

As an exhausted showrunner once confided to me that "What they
never tell you is that the job really is bigger than any one
person." Not only is he spot on, but it is for that exact same
reason that, over decades of television history, a system evolved
by which a team of highly creative people were put in a
privileged position of access to the seat of power and knowledge.

All you have to do is share with your writer/producers/
showrunners-in-training What You Want, then send them off to all
the meetings, and have them report back... and here's the beauty
part of all this: it's not as if you have to give up your command
authority and surrender all of your ego, you only have to
surrender a tiny little bit for a tiny little amount of time.

Remember the First Law, and remember that there will always be a
final meeting on all these matters before the scenes are shot.

That's right, Sparky, you can always change your mind! Shiny!

Why should you ask for help tracking multiple targets? Because it
all begins with the story - that's why - and you need to focus
your energy on making sure that the stories are developed to your
satisfaction from the ground up.

The more your stories represent the purest version of your
vision, the more involved will be your writers knowledge of that
vision, and the better your scripts are going to convey the
vision to everyone else involved with the production (as well as
the outlying regions, like the people who cut your promos at the
network, or the people who license the show for merchandising.
And yes, I'm sorry to report that the process by which your
stories portray your world view with great and specific passion
and clarity happens in the place you hate most: the writers room.

Even if you successfully defeat your inner control freak and
efficiently convey your message - and your writers carry it out
without any signal degradation, and your orders are performed to
the letter - you still have the daunting task of charting the
creative course of a season of up to twenty-four episodes. As I
said at the beginning, that means you have a story in development
in the room, a story in outline, a story being written, a story
being produced, and a story in post production.

Those are the most important of your multiple targets - and part
of your job is to free your mental bandwidth to make sure they
are right from jump street, and that you muster the necessary
fortitude and stamina to work with the denizens of the writers
room - annoying though they may be.

This is why conveying your vision clearly, and delegating the
conveyance of that vision to others is so important.

Now, if you do all that, and you still can't simultaneously work
on the story in development, the two stories on the page, the
story on the set, and the story in post production without
becoming confused and cranky... you might want to consider
becoming a novelist.

creative course of a season of up to twenty-four episodes. As I
said at the beginning, that means you have a story in development
in the room, a story in outline, a story being written, a story
being produced, and a story in post production.
Those are the most important of your multiple targets - and part
of your job is to free your mental bandwidth to make sure they
are right from jump street, and that you muster the necessary
fortitude and stamina to work with the denizens of the writers
room - annoying though they may be.
This is why conveying your vision clearly, and delegating the
conveyance of that vision to others is so important.
Now, if you do all that, and you still can't simultaneously work
on the story in development, the two stories on the page, the
story on the set, and the story in post production without
becoming confused and cranky... you might want to consider
becoming a novelist.

THE EIGHTH LAW OF SHOWRUNNING: 
RESIST THE SIREN CALL OF THE "SEXY GLAMOROUS JOBS" ESPECIALLY POST-PRODUCTION. SERIOUSLY.
STAY AWAY FROM POST-PRODUCTION FOR AS LONG AS HUMANLY POSSIBLE.

We are in the business of entertaining people. It then stands to
reason that many facets of the process of entertaining people are
entertaining in and of themselves... especially when the
alternative to these amusements is to skulk into a room full of
lousy, ungrateful writers sitting around, waiting for you to tell
them how to tell your story.

And what's fun about that? The writers are shouty, and judgy, and
kinda - what's the best way of saying this? - possessing of their
own individual identities and preoccupations that have nothing to
do with you. They don't appreciate your unique genius like they
should, the room stinks of take-out food and desperation, and the
stories don't even exist yet!

In that room, you have to figure out everything from scratch, and
make sure that one scene causes the next, and that the design of
the entire season arc makes logical sense, and that the dozens of
characters in the series are having complicated emotions.

It's hard!

You know where's fun? The place where they make the costumes. Oh
- it's awesome over there. They have drawings of pretty girls on
the walls, the costumers are frequently young and attractive -
and have a great sense of style and design - and, every once in a
while, beautiful actors come in and put on a fashion show for
you!

The same applies for the production design and prop fabrication
offices - festooned as they are with blueprints, concept art,
fabric samples, and awesome gizmos in various stages of
construction. And if you like that, wait 'til you hit the VFX
office, where the boffins will regale you with endless, and
gallantly woven, tales of pre-vis and fluid dynamics simulations!
Oh, and then there's casting. That's where you can hear actors
come in and say your lines in every manner possible... imagine
that: pretty people come in and say your beautiful words back to
you, and you get to JUDGE them with impunity!

These are what I call "the sexy, glamorous jobs." You can
convince yourself that your direct supervision of these tasks is
of the essence... especially if you are stuck on a difficult
story knot and the other writers keep telling you the direction
you want to go isn't going to untangle it.

There's another pernicious aspect to becoming too enamored of the
sexy glamorous jobs: the longer you spend with your other
departments - exploring all the options, deferring your
decisions, being generally unclear about your aesthetic goals,
and being dazed by all the pretty pictures people are showing you
- the more you rob from them the time they need to actually do
their job: the designing and construction of things that will
look great before the camera and not just sound great in your
conversation...

And, by and large, most of them will be too nice to tell you to
go away and let them work.

That's one of the reasons it's so pleasant for the showrunner to
go to a lot of these meetings outside the writers room. Unlike
the writers - whose role as creative partners and your closest
advisors gives them some leave to call you out on your shit -
most of the other departments cannot.

Remember, they know damn well you can fire anyone who displeases
you - and they are petrified that you will throw a hand grenade
into the work they have already completed - so they will indulge
your conversational needs and make you feel like you're a wit on
par with Oscar Wilde, and the Second Coming of Joss Whedon.
That's part of the siren song of the sexy glamorous jobs.

So don't be a Time Bandit (or a "Time Vampire," both terms used
by staffers I have known to describe malingering showrunners
seeking refuge from the the writers room). Tell people what you
want concisely and efficiently... and then leave...

Or better yet, tell one of your writer/producers what you want,
let them have the discussion with the different department heads
first, and then make course corrections later when there's an
adequate level of proof of concept.

All of this brings me to post-production.

There was a time when post-production was the most ignored and
insular department in TV production. The mechanics by which
episodes were edited and finished were analog, artisanal, and
very painstaking and time-consuming in a way wholly incompatible
with the fast pace of television production: literally requiring
the splicing of bits of film with sticky tape by hobbits working
in moist, mossy caves.

Back then, an episode would have to be edited, then screened in a
theater for the showrunner and producers, who would give their
notes either verbally or via memos, and then the film would be
sent back to the hobbits, who would meticulously (no, seriously,
they had to wear gloves) pull the strips of film apart from the
sticky tape, re-cut the film by hand to make the necessary
adjustments, splice the entire kit and kaboodle back together
with more sticky tape, and then screen it again for everyone's
approval.

In the late twentieth century - thanks to advances in computer
software and memory, and the development of the non-linear/non-
destructive editing workflow - post-production changed from a
fairly recondite process to becoming the single most seductive
time suck for showrunners seeking refuge from their actual job.
As anyone who has ever used iMovie can tell you, picture editing
is now like having a word processor for a movie - a movie that
you wrote (or rewrote and thus rescued from mediocrity)!

Honestly, there's a reason I refer to it as a siren's call - if
Narcissus were a showrunner, the editing room would be his
reflecting pool.

A showrunner can now go into the editing suite (usually a warmly
lit, air-conditioned room with a large leather couch put there to
appease the local Hutts, and massive high-definition screens with
a pipeline to the editing system) and watch an episode, a
sequence, a scene - even a single sequence of shots - over and
over again, and demand any change that enters his/her mind...
and, thanks to the miracle of computerized cut-and-paste and
endless levels of "undo" and "redo" see it all in real time, and
continue to demand changes until every combination of every frame
that was shot has been considered.

(Not to mention that with all that raw computing power, you can
spend days choosing just the right temp soundtrack, and putting
in makeshift VFX and titles and transitions - and basically
creating something amazingly polished that almost looks like a
real TV show...)

It's like getting ACTUAL work done.

Only it's not.

Really. It isn't. It only looks that way.

Though a humongous boon to the art and craft of television, the
rise of non-linear/non-destructive post-production has also
created an entire class of parasitic troglodytes (usually non-
writing producers desperate to justify their meddling ways) who
rally under the despicable war cry of "I'm GREAT in post!"
You wanna know what the words "I'm GREAT in post" in the mouth of
most producers are really dog whistle code for? "I will gladly
sit on that leather couch for an eternity and hound your helpless
editor into an assisted suicide."

I mean it. Someone invented the AVID and the next thing you know,
everyone and their mother is Pablo fuckin' Ferro. It stinks.
That's not to mean that there aren't producers - writing and non-
writing - who are, in fact, GREAT in post. There are, and their
contribution is invaluable. They are also a small, and gifted,
and rare species. Kind of like unicorns and shootable first
drafts.

If you are a showrunner and you're wondering whether or not
you're great in post, then you probably aren't.

If you are a showrunner and you find a non-writing producer who
is demonstrably great in post, then hire them, pay them well, and
use them to keep you out of the editing bay for as long as
possible.

Look. I get it. Eventually, all showrunners will have to spend
some time sitting on that leather couch frame-fucking the work.
We're messianic visionaries with an idiosyncratic "creative
process," and it's inevitable.

The trick to maintaining a healthy balance between the editing
room and the writers room is to not fool yourself into thinking
that post-production is where the show truly is - and to
recognize that, more often than not, post is where the fearful go
to hide from their writers.

The most egregious offender I have encountered in this respect
was a showrunner (yes, another one whose work I guarantee you
respect and admire) had a ratio of hours spent in editing versus
time spent in the writers room that was easily ten to one. When
asked about this, the showrunner would insist that he had to
spend all that time in editing because that's how his "creative
process" worked. In his own words, he needed that time in editing
to "find the show."

Had I not needed that job as the result of a very ill-advised
condo purchase, I might have politely suggested that he was
looking for the show in the wrong place... and perhaps added that
if he spent more time in the writers room (you know, where the
show is actually created) he might not need to spend so much in
editing trying to reverse-engineer "the show" in his mind into
"the show" that was actually filmed.

The result of this showrunner's contempt for the writers room -
and his insistence on dwelling in the editing room - was a
vicious cycle. Having only enough endurance for us trolls to sign
off on the broadest strokes of a story, the showrunner was
setting up every one of his writers to fail: a situation
exacerbated by his being an extremely tough and punitive grader.

The showrunner would invariably throw out multiple scripts a
season, and "fix" the ones he only hated enough to rewrite from
page one with whatever ideas came to his increasingly fatigued
mind. The showrunner would then wait for the film, and retreat to
post-production to "find" the episode. Rinse and repeat.

So how do you mitigate the siren call? By keeping your eye on the
story, and by delegating to those who know the story best the
task of making sure that the cut has been maximized toward the
telling of the story before you step into the editing room (you
would be surprised at how often a director's cut - which is
always the first cut shown to the writer/producers per union
rules - prioritize the director's visual flair over more prosaic
concerns like pacing and clarity of narrative).

So let's say you're the showrunner and the director's cut has
just been finished. Instead of going into the editing room to
watch it from the leather couch - and start frame fucking before
the theme music kicks up - watch it on a DVD in your office with
the editor and the episode writer. Have a thorough discussion
with them as to whether the scenes are telling the story
(concerns of style and flair can wait until the story is solid)
while an assistant takes notes, and then send the editor off to
perform the notes.

When the editor is ready with the next iteration of the episode,
do NOT look at it. Send the writer of the episode in to look at
the next cut and let him or her decide whether the notes were
addressed and give the next round of feedback: again, focussing
on whether or not the film is telling the story.

Only after you've allowed these steps to take place - maybe more
than once - should you get on the leather couch and make it sing.
When you begin to work this way, you may feel like you're
abandoning a child during a crucial developmental stage, but I
promise you - what you are doing is giving the children being
conceived a fighting chance at life.

Now, just because I am an advocate of delegating to your staff
doesn't mean I am blind to the truth that even a person of your
impeccable good taste and judgment could, potentially make a bad
staffing decision here and there. Purely accidentally, of course.
It is a sad truth that not all of your hires may be up to the
tasks you assign for them, but before you break out the pink
slips, you may want to consider...

THE NINTH LAW OF SHOWRUNNING:
EXPECT YOUR WRITERS TO PERFORM AT VARYING LEVELS OF COMPETENCE

As I mentioned previously, you are not just running a
corporation, but also a spoke of the apprentice-to-master wheel
which many of your writers will ride all the way to becoming
senior level writer/producers and showrunners themselves. You may
neither want - nor be qualified, or fitted by temperament - to be
a teacher and a mentor, but, as that poignant, and now-classic,
song goes, "Whoomp, there it is."

Among the many keys to being a successful mentor is the
understanding that - when you have a room full of writers of
different ranks and levels of ability - they will all perform on
the page, and in the writers room, differently.

The executive producer-level writer with twenty-five years of
experience - the person who ran his or her own show last year and
is now on your staff as your Number Two - should be reliably
expected to turn in drafts in which the scene structures will be
solid, the characters will speak with a voice close to what you
have established (provided you have been following the Second Law
with some measure of diligence), and the dialogue will sparkle
with not only style and brio, but also reflect in every movement
the emotional state of the characters as you have designed it for
not just the one episode, but also the sweep of the series. You
may not ultimately like this writer's execution of the material -
that part is subjective - but you should have no doubt upon
reading their work that you are in the hands of a pro.

This is what your senior level writer/producer has been doing for
twenty-five years: learning how to solve story problems in
script, mastering the craft of creating scenes that have a
discrete beginning, middle, and end - perhaps with a memorable
button/punch-line - figuring out how to weave the prosaic
concerns of plot and theme into dialogue that conceals the
storytelling machinery beneath, and gaining mastery over all of
the different patterns by which scenes ebb and flow into one
another... all in the service of giving you - the showrunner - a
reading experience that will not only sound to you like your own
voice, but like your own voice peppered with the mastery of an
accomplished craftsman skilled in the ways of hiding his or her
own genius so well that you mistake it for your own.

The assistant who got to share a story credit last season, and
whom you promoted to staff writer a week ago as a reward for
their loyalty, hard work, and support - and because you read a
spec script of theirs that you don't really know how long they
took to write (or how much input they had from others in its
creation) - cannot be expected to deliver on that level. It's on
you to not only budget your time and energy accordingly to give
thoughtful notes and rewrite their material, but also to muster
the largesse to judge their work more leniently and recognize
where that beginning-level writer has performed at, or above and
beyond, their level of skill.

To most showrunners, this seems exceptionally unfair... and it
is, to be honest, something of a damned nuisance. After all,
staff writers have as much freedom to share their opinion and
ideas in the colloquium of the writers room (and, frankly, many
denizens of the lower levels avail themselves of that right way
too freely when what they should be doing is shutting the fuck up
and learning). Hell, just yesterday one of the staff writers had
the audacity to suggest that one of your ideas wasn't all that
good - and they didn't even have the good taste to pitch
something with which to replace it! So why is it on you to grade
them on a curve?

Because it's on you to help them achieve the level of mastery
where their scripts look and read like those of the twenty-five
year veteran. That's why. Just like it's also on you to make them
responsible citizens of the writers room, and suggest to them
when it's OK to criticize and when to hold back.

Similarly, the process by which you give notes to your writers
isn't some cargo cult where you park a script to spin its palm-
frond-and-coconut turboprops until you have the time to save it
with your rewriting genius. The better and more well-considered
your feedback and tutelage, the better the scripts your writers
will produce. And it isn't some glacial process: give your staff
the most accurate and specific information about what you want,
and the most constructive feedback as to the how and why (and
yes, describing to them WHAT to write counts - don't think they
will resent your telling them exactly what you want the scene to
look/sound like), and you will see marked improvement from script
to script.

Funny how simple that sounds, and yet, many showrunners just
can't wrap their heads around that concept. Sometimes it's just
more expedient and less exhausting to give a younger writer a
bunch of busywork until you find the time to fix it yourself.
It's also wrong, and a disservice to your trade.

But do it you must... and, hey, at the end of the season, or the
conclusion of the writers' contracts - you can always fire those
writers who don't "get it"...

But you know what you DON'T get to do? (Well, you can do it all
you want, actually - most showrunners do - but you can't call
yourself "a human being" in my book if you do.) You don't get to
read the staff writer's first draft - oftentimes the first thing
this person has written under the time and content restrictions
of a writing staff - and say "wow, they just don't 'get it' and
I'm going to fire them."

You hired them. You teach them.

More work, Sparky, I know. But... as the now-classic song taught
us all: "It's hard out here for a pimp."

The flip side of the atrocities described above is the following
ubiquitous and nasty little bit of stupidity - usually
perpetrated by showrunners who wrongheadedly fancy themselves
"men of the people" - the privileging of notes and feedback from
"trusted" outsiders over that of experienced professionals.

One showrunner for whom I worked a few years back insisted that
they could not finalize a script until they got notes from the
line cook at his childhood hometown diner... it was his way of
making sure he stayed "real."

While this was the most extreme version of this delusion that I
have encountered, it's not that far on the end of the spectrum
from the many, many showrunners who believed that bullshit some
other successful showrunner once said in a WGA magazine interview
about "the best idea should win, I don't care WHERE it comes
from," and shows this fealty to their trade unionist roots by
continually calling in the twenty-five year old who runs the
phones in the reception area to tell the twenty-five year veteran
"that idea you had the other day about how to make this script
better."

Though my harsh response to this scenario - which I have
encountered to a vomitous extreme over the length of my career
(hell, I was once the twenty-five year-old in question, I thought
it was awesome to be consulted, and later paid for the favor in
blood) - may, on the surface seem like the parochial upholding of
hierarchical entitlement by a threatened old-timer, here's why
it's a horrible thing to do...

A. By the time a pitch/outline/script comes to you, the writers
room has undoubtedly discussed it to every possible endgame:
that's their job. The assistant's idea may sound great on the
face of it, but you were probably in post-production when it
came up in the room and was considered. More likely than not,
it was already tossed around, taken for a test drive, kicked
on the tires, and judged wanting for reasons that you have not
yet had the time to consider.

B. You have also - and whether you think this is the more senior
writer being too sensitive, you did it anyway - told the
person whom you should be trusting with the stewardship of
your vision that you, frankly, don't really trust them all
that much with the stewardship of your vision. It's a tone-
deaf, disempowering, rookie mistake that - more often than not
- indicates a pattern of disrespect and disempowerment.

C. You have sent the message that it's OK for a young and
inexperienced person to speak out against a superior. That's
is not a sin necessarily, but applied capriciously and
frequently, it does breed in the writers room a weird
entitlement in which junior members of the staff wind up
holding back the process because they now believe they have
authority above their position. You wonder why the room feels
so spiky, and is so full of Napoleonic junior writers who have
so high an esteem for their own criticism of your ideas?
Wonder, instead, whether you are encouraging this behavior.

D. You have put the younger member of the hierarchy in the
awkward position of being shut down in front of you - the
supreme leader - by another one of his/her mentors. It's a
scenario in which everyone loses face and feels like shit
except for you. You get to go on with your life thinking
you're a "man of the people" because everyone is too afraid to
tell you otherwise... but the truth is, the younger member of
the staff hates you for making them pitch to someone who now
wants to punch you in the face by proxy by punching them in
the face... and the cycle continues.

E. You are perpetuating the fiction that you are a "nice person"
and a "good boss" when what you are in fact doing is
privileging the counsel of people whose power differential
with yours is so steep that they will never actually question
your decisions in a productive way. You think you are
fomenting the genius of the precocious and prodigious, but
what you are in fact doing is creating a cult of personality
in the form of skewed, dysfunctional mentor/mentee
relationships that will damage the conduct and career of your
charges down the line.

Now let's say that the young man or woman who answers the phones
in the front office comes to you with an idea that you do find
undeniable and beguiling. How do you present it to your staff
without triggering the apocalypse of awkwardness described above?

You give the note yourself without the youngling in the room - if
it succeeds the tests, you then graciously give credit to the
youngling, also preferably without them in the room, and then
later let them know that their idea is being used and that
everyone knows where it came from. If the idea is proven to have
already been talked about and discarded - and you realize you
yourself are behind the mainstream of the creative process in
your own room by pitching it - you take it on the chin, shrug it
off as a brain fart and move on. Showrunners never loses face
when they admit to a brain fart - in fact, it makes them kind of
adorbs.

Conversely, if you are the youngest/least experienced/lowest-
ranked writer on a staff and have an objection to the work of a
more senior writer (and am only giving this advice here because
it behooves showrunners to teach this kind of behavior), and have
an idea as to how you might fix it (if you don't, you are - in
the words of the Dowager Countess - about as useful as a glass
hammer), then run your criticism/idea by the next person from you
in the hierarchy... and maybe then go with that person to the
next person up. You build consensus, insure that the ground under
your feet is solid, and then throw the hand grenade.

These last two points do bring up one, frequently very difficult
managerial conundrum - what do you do when your writers room
truly includes a bad apple? Does that fall under the rubric of
"expecting writers to behave at different levels of competence?"

Actually, it absolutely does - but that doesn't mean you have to
tolerate it, and there are a lot of very useful strategies to
mitigate the damage done by negative actors in your staff. Let's
begin by identifying the three most common kinds of bad apples
that show up in writers staffs and rooms:

1. The "Doctor No" - A writer who responds most ideas that are
not theirs with "that sucks" and then proceeds to let everyone
know - usually in breathtakingly explicit detail - how and why
the idea sucks... usually without providing any concrete
advice about how to fix the problem. Especially cancerous
Doctor Noes will sometimes make a practice of coming back days
- or even weeks - after the idea has been accepted and put to
work in the DNA of the story and bringing things to a grinding
halt by explaining why it sucks, of course, never offering any
helpful hints as to how to actually... you know... fix the
problem.

2. The "Hostage Taker" - Sometimes, Doctor Noes take such
pleasure oraculating about their objections that they cross
the line into Hostage Taker. I once had the misfortune of
running a room in which the local Doctor No, upon making his
objections clear, would - if they were not immediately, and
diligently addressed by the rest of the staff as a hot rush
life-or-death crisis - put on a hundred yard pout, whip out a
cellphone, and conspicuously play Doodle Jump while emitting
as many Huffs and Snorts as necessary to ensure that no one
could move forward without acknowledging his displeasure.
Another brand of hostage-taking, not related to Doctor No-ism,
comes from the writer who mistakes the safe and open
environment of the ideal room - to which its participants
should be able to bring their personal business, within the
understood parameters of it being germane and additive to the
story - for their own psychotherapy session/PhD thesis
defense. For these hostage takers, time is a Philip Glassian
concept, the sound of their own voice is Black Tar Heroin.

3. The Politician/Manipulator/Insulter - This, of course, refers
to those people who, through either tone deafness, a desire to
be heard and provoke at any cost the laughter and delight that
daddy never found in their wit, or just plain old-fashioned
sociopathic malice, use information divulged in the open forum
of the writers room to either publicly or privately hurt,
undermine, make a punchline out of the other writers. This
disease can be especially pernicious, because the room runs on
a certain amount of trust and sensitivity, and repairing that
trust is an exponential investment of time from the speed with
which it can be broken. Sometimes, this brand of Bad Apple-ism
cannot be corrected: some assholes just love the feeling of
power that comes from Making Others Feel Like Shit.

The strategies you need to correct these problems are simple, and
straightforward. Oftentimes the people doing these things do not
realize that they are doing them - showrunning is so full of
incompetent senior management that many people will go through
entire careers without realizing that they are behaving badly.
Correcting bad behavior is one of your jobs, even if most
showrunners don't do it because it requires... gulp...
confrontation. Here are the five simplest ways of clearing your
barrels of the Bad Apples...

1. Throw the problem back at Doctor No - This one is simple,
easy, and works 95% of the time. Doctor No tells you that they
disapprove of something, you tell them "You break it, you
bought it." Your perception of a problem is worse than useless
if you do not have a fix. If you can pitch an objection, but
not a solution, you have not earned the right to speak: as
showrunner, you get to express that to your writers, first in
the most polite way possible, and then in escalating levels of
exasperation until it sticks. In rooms I have run, I simply
make a declaration of this early and often - you don't get to
criticize if you don't show up in overalls with a toolbox.
More importantly, expressing this is an important part of your
job as a teacher: most writers' critical faculty develops
earlier than the more craft-focused, patience-requiring,
spade-and-trowel discipline of story generation and repair. If
you don't correct this behavior early and often, you are
causing yourself and other showrunners a lot more trouble down
the line.

2. Confront the problem early, head on, and earnestly - You may
think that you have to come up with an artful way of bringing
up a difficult interpersonal issue to a staff member. Guess
what? You don't. Leave the florid writing and brilliant scene
structures for the page. If someone is chronically hijacking
the room, tell them firmly, but politely (and preferably
privately) that "You have a tendency to overshare, it's not
always useful, and it undermines the times when what you have
to say helps move the story forward," or "You need to watch
the jokes about people's personal lives, they come across as
hurtful," or (and this was once said to me - and to this day,
I thank the bearer of this statement) "Your graphic
descriptions of your self-loathing and body image issues are
making the other writers uncomfortable, you may want to take
your hand off the throttle." Life is not a script, and you
don't have to excessively artful - or artfully impolite and
cruel - to tell people what you need from them. If they push
back, don't engage or become defensive, hear them out, and let
them know that they have been heard but that - their defense
notwithstanding - you have identified the problem and want it
worked on. This is often a crucial aspect of problem-solving:
a lot of people just want to know that they are on the record,
even if it doesn't change the outcome. Remember, you're not
paid to be anyone's best friend, and you're not a Man of the
People: you're the boss. If the pushback becomes so strident
that you soon realize this person will not be taught, then
there's always the nuclear option:

3. Exile - The Doctor No I described above eventually proved so
unwilling to step back on the endless, process-killing
objections about the quality of the show - and the capacity of
the writing staff to address them - that it was eventually
necessary to figure out a better use for his talent. This
writer was given scene writing assignments on multiple by the
showrunner - who genuinely valued his work on the page - and
kept out of the writers room altogether. Over the course of
several shows, I have often seen incorrigibly narcissistic
Hostage Takers sent to perform producorial services on the set
- where a willingness to argue, clarify, and pontificate is
often a boon instead of a liability. So much of what happens
on the set is about clarifying, especially for the actors, the
context of the work at hand, that these hostage-takers often
blossom there. This is not an optimal solution: writers are
paid to write and contribute ideas, but sometimes, writers are
so incompatible with the collaborative process that you may
find yourself cornered into having to find an alternate use
for their talents, at least until you can let them go, and
they can be hired in another show that might have a culture
more suited to their personal style.

4. Discuss the problem with your closest subordinate, have them
deal with it in one of the ways described above, and save your
intervention as a court of final appeal - The reason a twenty-
five year veteran is being well-paid to be your right hand is
because they bring the experience and weight to deal with
problems like this. Use them - decide which of you is to be
the good cop, which of you is to be the bad cop, let them deal
with the problem, have their back, and if the recalcitrant
writer insists on no changing, use the power of your office to
reinforce the message at a later time.

5. Fire their time-sucking ass - Sometimes, there's just no two
ways about it. Firing people sucks. I've done it and it's
nowhere as satisfying as it looks on The Apprentice. It's
stressful and emotionally draining. The merciful way (once you
have dotted all your i's and crossed all your t's with the
studio's HR) is to rip off the Band-Aid and be done with it,
then everyone can move on.

I know, Sparky, it's all so complicated. Like court machinations
in the Ming Dynasty. Can't we all just be comrades and equals?

One person, one vote?

No. We can't.

We all want to pretend there's geniuses and prodigies in all of
the inexperienced people we hire - mostly because it bolsters the
idea that we ourselves came from the ranks of the genial and
prodigious. The truth is, however, that you gain mastery over the
form and function of television in the same way that chess
players master their game: by studying old games, internalizing
the patterns, and practicing, practicing, practicing. Lay-people
mistake both chess and writing as explosions of genius-level
creativity - but where does the black powder for that explosion
come from?

It comes from pattern recognition. That's why the twenty-five
year veteran is usually so good at the job of breaking story,
even if the younger writers demonstrate a greater flair for
dialogue, or can render the rhythms of the current popular
culture with greater fidelity. Veterans don't have to reinvent
the wheel every time out. The veteran looks at the notecards on
the board and recognizes the ten different ways the game can go
from that point to a win, or a draw, or a defeat.

There are only so many variations in chess and in story telling -
the reason you rely on the experience of the veteran is that they
don't have to play every variation in order to predict how to
reach the outcome you want. The art of writing is in how you
disguise the mechanics of this assembly, just as the art of chess
comes from fooling your opponent into not seeing your endgame
thirty moves ahead.

You may be tempted by the idea of a cabinet of equals, marching
in lockstep and doing what's best for the creative process - but
your job is to lead and to teach, not to be loved. You earn love
by recognizing that everyone's gifts are different and giving
your employees an environment in which is it safe to try, and to
both succeed and fail.

Every member of a writing staff is, in some way, on the hook for
the education of the next person below them; recognizing that
everyone is working at a different level is your first step
toward building camaraderie. All that pretending that all animals
are equal ever gets to is the embarrassing revelation that some
are more equal than others, and to you looking like an asshole.

Hierarchy is not a dirty word. Hierarchy is not the sign of a
hidebound mind that resists change and innovation. Hierarchy is
not proof that you're a square and sell-out. Properly enacted,
and thoughtfully maintained, hierarchy is the flak jacket that
allows each member of your staff to reach their highest potential
without being shredded by gunfire.

THE TENTH LAW OF SHOWRUNNING:
DELIVER GOOD AND BAD NEWS EARLY AND OFTEN

Though I have beat to the ground the analogy of television show
as startup corporation, the time has come for me to admit that -
being as it may - a television show is also something of a
wandering circus, with tents, and instruments, and artisans, and
sideshows... and all the dramas that come along when your force a
hundred or more people into close communion under the pressure
cooker that is intense work performed under great stress for a
defined period of time.

Invariably, drama comes from secrets. In my experience, secrets
are poison - especially when you are exposed as their bearer.
Sunlight is the best disinfectant.

The Tenth Law of showrunning is a close dependent of the Second:
as the sun source of the show's vision and the one best qualified
to say What It Is and What It Is not, make the ripping of Band-
Aids your business, rumor control your secondary vocation, and
complete transparency your ultimate goal...

And save the drama for the screen.

The reasons for this are of the essence of the First and Second
Laws. You want and need to be the source of all that is true
about your show - even if that truth is unpleasant. The worst
position for a leader is as the bearer of bad news everyone
already knows.

Any information that aids the speed and efficiency of creation -
even if it hurts feelings - is worth exposing early, tactfully,
and often... and if that information exposes you as the cause of
a blunder, you are better off putting your pride aside and owning
up than expecting everyone who works for you become the unwilling
accomplices in - and hostages of - the protection of your own
delicate sensibilities.

Whenever a rumor, a lie, or a truth that you have not sanctioned
takes on a life of its own, it undermines your own ability to set
the tone, define the parameters, and describe a path to success.
One of the more famous Hollywood memoirs is titled "Which Lie Did
I Tell?" (Although my personal favorite title of a Hollywood
memoir is "What Just Happened?")

Anyway, the title connotes a certain lack of remorse; the idea
that part of the swingin' fun of makin' movies is a certain
commitment to juggling deceptions until the final product is done
and the chips fall where they may. The problem is that, where
movies are, in contrast, fly-by-night operations, success in
television means a long haul in close quarters: most lies, and
their tellers, lack the stamina to survive for long.

To me transparency is not just a moral imperative to the life of
a showrunner; it's a necessary lifeline. If you need to devote
one iota of your energy to deception tracking and maintenance,
that's an iota that's not going to the work you need to
accomplish in the writers room. Hell, that energy would be better
spent doing any one of the sexy glamorous jobs.

Transparency streamlines your life. Being transparent before
anyone can be transparent for you means you control the
narrative. Giving bad news before they crash land means no one
can claim surprise at a bad break: the best thing a showrunner
can say in the face of a difficult situation - especially where
networks and studios, whose institutional memory is that of a
goldfish and whose capacity to accept the blame for anything is
nil - is "You can't say I didn't tell you this was coming."
Well, that, and "Here's the solution, you don't have to worry, I
got this."

When everyone knows the truth, no one can be surprised by its
arrival - and when it comes from you, no one can say that you
lost control. And we all know that if there's something that
showrunners love, it's control... sweet, sweet, control.

Well, control and one other thing... the last thing you have to
sacrifice if you actually want to be good at this job. Are you
ready, Sparky? This one's gonna hurt in the short term, but in
the long term, it's the one that's going to make you look most
like a prince...

THE ELEVENTH LAW OF SHOWRUNNING:
SHARE CREDIT FOR SUCCESS TO A FAULT

The Eleventh and final Law of showrunning is the tail of the
snake in the mouth of the First...

Never miss an opportunity to point out how another person's work
has made you look good. It’s your name on the show and it’s all
about you anyway, so you lose nothing by sharing credit.

I know that it sounds counter-intuitive. I know you feel
embattled, and suspect that everyone is out to get you - even
your own writers, whom you secretly believe write poorly on
purpose just to spite, frazzle, and drive you to an early grave -
and that everyone wants you to fail and prove your daddy right...
so you must fight to be recognized as the creative genius behind
every success.

I get it... but I have been through to the other side and have
come back to tell you - and I know this one's a difficult one to
swallow - you don't.

And you know why? That recognition comes to you weekly in the
form of the largest paycheck on the payroll, the biggest office
in the suite, the parking spot closest to the front door, and the
Executive Producer credit in the main titles of every episode of
the show - along with your production company card after the end
titles.

Everyone knows who and what you are. Everyone is hanging on your
words. You have no need to hoard what belongs to others in the
name of gaining recognition for your struggles, however arduous
and hard-fought they may seem.

In my twenty years, I have, regrettably, but not at all
surprisingly, witnessed literally dozens, if not hundreds, of
interactions between showrunners and network or studio executives
in which the showrunner has - either purposefully or, even worse,
casually and without concern or understanding of the
ramifications - said something like: "If the last draft [NAME OF
WRITER] handed to me is any indication, you won't be seeing that
script for a while" or "The truth is, I had to rewrite every page
[NAME OF WRITER] ever gave me" or the hardy perennial "I have to
rewrite ALL the scripts from page one" or "[NAME OF WRITER]
really boned me with that draft," or the jolly old chestnut: "If
only I could find a staff of writers that could just do my show."

For this type of showrunner, even praise comes from the left hand
with a price in flesh and blood. I'm reminded of the fucking
douchebag (yes, another person whose work I guarantee you respect
and admire) who once said to me - at a cocktail party and within
earshot of several members of his writing staff - "Well, I got
the first round of scripts and the good news is at least I don't
have to fire anyone... yet" (cue "charming" devilish grin).

Two things happen when you make comments like this in any context
other than the actual moment at the actual end of the actual
season when you actually have to take stock and make the actual
decision to actually fire a staff member...

One: Your venting of your temporary frustration with a bad draft
or an incompatible hiring choice to the Powers That Be at the
studio and network colors their perception of that writer for FAR
longer than you can possibly know. That's right, Sparky, you may
have just shanked someone's career to make yourself feel better.

Two: You come across as a whiny fucking anhedonic little shit who
has no concept of how good they have it.

You know all those network executives who listen to your troubles
and trials, and sound - on the phone, and over countless sushi
lunches - like they feel your pain?

They don't.

The network and studio are more invested in the success and
longevity of the show than they are in the success and longevity
of you. It's a distinction with a subtle, but massive difference.
Need an example? The West Wing outlasted Aaron Sorkin for three
seasons. An extreme example, to be sure, but the studio made
damned sure the show made it to syndication, turned a profit, and
kept its place in all those "top twenty/thirty/forty/fifty series
of all time" lists with or without him. Though the show was
definitely seen as lacking the spark that made Sorkin's seasons a
cultural event - John Wells's stewardship of the studio's
precious resource produced a very respectable and stable series
whose merits remained defendable to the very last day.

Also - and it gives me no pleasure to report this, Sparky -
studio and network are certainly not invested in furthering your
self-concept as a put-upon genius suffering a confederacy of
dunces hellbent on holding back your brave attempts at self
expression.

It sounds mean and mercenary, but it's called "show business,"
not "show friends" - and when they hear you throwing other
writers under the bus, their words to you may be sympathetic, but
what they are thinking isn't "Oh, poor, sweet, hard-working
Sparky," but rather, "Sparky seems to have a very hard time
making good hiring decisions and his inability to put together a
functioning staff may become a liability, let's file that away
for his next contract negotiation."

So there you go: two good reasons not to be the kind of
showrunner who doesn't liberally share credit for success with
his or her staff. One, it makes you sound like a fucking
douchebag. Two, it makes you sound like an INCOMPETENT fucking
douchebag.

The wonderful thing about credit is that it's not a finite
resource. Now, I know that, somewhere along the line, someone
made you believe that the credit dinosaurs were crushed under the
Earth's crust a billion years ago, and it's all running out, and
you have to hoard the stuff like you're fuckin' Smeagol.

Maybe it was your daddy who told you this instead of letting you
know that he loved you, and so you feel like you must now follow
his lead just in case it really is running out. But it's just not
true. And, in all honesty, now that we are really getting to know
one another, I'm really starting to think that your daddy is just
not a good source for truth.

The truth is this: the more credit you give, the more credit you
get - for being a genius and hiring a great staff, for being a
good boss and a nice person (finally!) who can acknowledge the
contributions of others, for fostering a positive work
environment, and - most crucially - for being the kind of
showrunner who protects their writers from the kinds of short
term judgments that you have the liberty rethink in the long
term.

And yet there will be times when the studio or network will ask
for a draft that you are not prepared to hand over because you
need to do a lot of work on it because the writers didn't nail
it, you know what you say?

You say: "There's still work to be done." That's it. You won't
sound incompetent, You won't sound like a fucking douchebag. If
there is pushback from the studio or network, take the
responsibility yourself: own it and revel in the truth that you
are SO big, and powerful, and OZ-like, that a blow that would
cripple the career of someone of lesser rank is but a ding on
your door.

And it's one of those plastic minivan doors that bounces back
after the shopping cart hits it, by the way... the ding vanishes
- as if by magic - the moment you turn in the script and it's
great.

The reason this is the final Law of Showrunning is not just that
it feeds right back into the First Law, but also that it is the
biggest test of character before you as someone who has just been
handed something close to absolute power in the business.

How you deal with praise, and success, and all the concomitant
slings and arrows thrown at you for your position - and whether
you recognize that you have within it the strength to be that
aforementioned flak jacket to your staff - is as true a test of
your self-esteem and worth as a person as anything you will ever
face. As a senior manager you have the ability to either make
your show and bring up with you an entire class of people who
will credit you for their learning and empowerment... or to make
your show with a huge amount of staff turnover, a reputation for
being difficult, and a great deal of overwork heaped upon you by
your own inability to earn your staff's loyalty.

Again, because I feel very strongly about this, I am going to go
ahead and hit below the belt once more... forgive me, Sparky, but
here it goes...

You don't earn daddy's love by hoarding all the good stuff and
claiming it as your entitlement. You defeat daddy - and shame him
into respect and admiration - by raising an entire generation of
daughters and sons who don't perpetuate his legacy of abuse and
abandonment. You make daddy look at you and see something he
never made, and, in that way, you make him finally understand his
own loss.

And then you forgive him.

(And let me make one thing clear about "daddy." I know the love
of an effusive, demonstrative, and generous father - one whose
accomplishments in his own field will forever dwarf the ones I
have in mine, but never made our lives a competition in any way -
as well as a kind hearted, giving, and supportive mother... and I
still have bad mentors, bosses, and colleagues, male and female,
who have made me feel robbed, worthless, and abused. So, if you
were about to say "None of this applies to me because I like my
father," go ahead and choke on that. Everyone has some figure
like this in their life - and, unless you make peace with them,
their influence as a motivator diminishes far more rapidly than
does their effect in making you the same as them to others.)

Now we come to the part where you say something like: "But what
about the undeniable truth that I can only do my best work
between the hours of three and five in the morning while the
prettiest assistant in the bullpen sits on the couch listening to
me talk out my ideas?" (true story, for at least three different
series I'm aware of)...

Or "But if I can't see every possible version of every possible
scene in the edit bay, I will never be able to live with myself
knowing that the final product could have been something better
than what it is," (paraphrase of an actual quote)...

Or "The writers room is all fine and dandy, but the only time I
can really relax is when the writers come to my house on the
weekend, where I can smoke up and really let the creative juices
flow away from the hustle-and-bustle and distractions," (yup,
that happened)...

Or "How can I possibly reset my creative energies unless EVERYONE
participates in the mandatory all-office 10PM pinball elimination
tournament?" (You hear this story around town a lot, I'm not sure
who the culprit is... and sometimes it's foosball instead of
pinball)

Or "All those other shows may have writing styles that can be
taught, but mine is so unique and and different that only I can
render it in a way that satisfies my inner metronome," (Not a
direct quote, but expressed by multiple showrunners - oftentimes
as a badge of pride in interviews)...

Or "All this talk of management, and strategy, and humility is
fine and dandy for ordinary hacks who are willing to settle for
less, but I'm a demanding perfectionist!" (True in spirit for the
majority)

Or just plain "What about my 'creative process'?"

Well, shit, Sparky... I thought we could be friends... but since
the last eighty-thousand words have obviously failed to get my
point through to you, I'm gonna have to Call Down The Thunder.
Shut the fuck up about your creative process. That's what about
your creative process.

Your "creative process" is what you did in the dark with your
Speed Racer jammies around your ankles while mommy and daddy
slept in the next room. Your "creative process" is the fiction
you peddle to magazines when you're successful. Your "creative
process" is the way you punish yourself and others for the
unpardonable sin of being good at a job daddy didn't approve of
but secretly wanted for himself.

Between just the two of us here in our grown-up dungarees, we
both know damn well that there isn't a single writer who works
for money who - when the time comes - can't just sit the fuck
down and bang it the fuck out.

Now, guess what? Every single day of your life while your show is
on the air is that time.

The price that you pay to play on the word stage and sermonize to
an audience of millions is that you have to make concessions
between the tempestuous artiste you idealized for yourself when
you thought working in TV was the equivalent of being put on the
train to Hogwarts and the reality that you are now a grown-ass
adult professional who earns more for producing a single episode
of television than most people do in a year. The price of
admission to the Majors is that you now have people who depend on
you - not just for their living, but also their physical,
creative, and emotional well-being - and, oh yes, an audience
that's waiting to be entertained.

Your creativity is there - it was always there - and it will
always be there. Your creativity is a renewable resource - just
like praise, and credit, and the simple, difficult truth that
your daddy's neglect wasn't really your fault.

No, really. It was probably the result of his own abuse at the
hands of your grandfather and had nothing to do with you as a
person.

Your creativity is fed by everything around you - especially the
great people you hired to facilitate this difficult undertaking -
and is not some finite thing that must be hoarded and protected
with arcane devices and traps. Whether you do or do not choose to
embrace this truth, you owe it to the people who have signed up
to work for you to not visit upon them the traumas of your past
because that is the only way you think you can perform on the
page.

Facing this may be the hardest and most painful truth for any
writer. We cling to our delusions, depressions, and darknesses.
We mistakenly believe that our creativity is a karmic recompense
for the torturous havoc our inner gloom wreaks upon us and must
therefore preserve that gloom at all costs. Of course, nothing
could be further from the truth: while one certainly informs the
other, your darkness and your writing come from different
places... losing one will not affect the other.

And, if you don't have the time or energy to lay down your
affectations once and for all, you can at least cultivate the
requisite human decency to shield others from your insanity by
building a scaffold of professionalism around yourself. Suffer
for your art if you must, but make the effort to prevent others
from becoming participants in your daily reenactment of your
trauma. If you make a habit of practicing any number of these
Laws, even in the most desultory manner, I promise that it will
make your life, and your relationships - both in and out of the
job - at least a little bit better.

Of course, you don't have to take my word for this.

The final, flithiest little secret of this essay is that you
don't actually have to take my word for anything. That's right,
Sparky - in case you didn't notice the leitmotif running through
the massive spew of verbiage you have so courageously navigated,
let me lay it out in pornographic detail...

Every horror story I have told... every tale of madness, rage,
and abuse... every last little malfeasant example of selfish and
wrongheaded management... was perpetrated by a showrunner "whose
work I guarantee you respect and admire."

So there you go. The path is clear for you to be the monster you
always knew you could be. Your success - as weighed by critical
praise, awards wins, and financial recompense - will have little
to do with whether you follow these Eleven Laws.

These may, in fact, be the only Laws you ever see that are not
only completely optional, but - in all honesty - tangential to
the most commonly accepted definition of success in your chosen
field.

So I will just leave them here - as they say in the business of
show - "For Your Consideration."

What happens next is up to you.

Me? I'm going to go check my email to see how many of my former
bosses have written me angry missives demanding to know why I
would nickname them "Sparky."

Notes. There's just no getting away from them.
